\section{Related Work}
\label{relatedwork}

Volume Visualization enables viewing of three-dimensional data by rendering
sampled function of three spatial dimensions and projecting the translucent
volume onto a 2D projection plane. While many techniques exist for volume
rendering such as marching cubes~\citep{lorensen_marching_1987}, image
splatting~\citep{westover_footprint_1990}, texture
slicing~\citep{rezk-salama_interactive_2000, engel_high-quality_2001} and ray
casting~\citep{hsu_segmented_1993, ma_parallel_1995, ma_scalable_1997,
heng_gpu-based_2005}, ray casting has become one of the most used ones on modern
graphics hardware. Ray casting technique provides a higher quality of rendering
and many ways to optimize the rendering of the volume such as early ray
termination and space leaping~\citep{yagel_accelerating_1993}.

While the Ray Casting a well-known technique and various implementations exists,
the challenge of providing high-quality volume visualization with dataset of
varying size, spacing, and format, with or without the geometry rendering, on
multiple platforms (Desktop, Cave, Head Mounted Displays (HMD)) and Operative
Systems (Apple, Linux, Window) at interactive speed is still a challenge.

Few open-source implementations exist such as
Voreen~\citep{meyer-spradow_voreen:_2009} which initiated at Department of
Computer Science at the University of MÃ¼nster, Germany in 2004.  It provides
features such as Isosurface Rendering, Maximum Intensity Projection
(MIP)~\citep{wallis_three-dimensional_1989}, support for 1D and 2D transfer
functions, and support for different illumination models (Phong, Tone, Ambient
Occlusion). Both Voreen and VTK uses data-flow networks. However, Voreen is
Volume Visualization library whereas VTK is a Scientific Visualization library
and provides better support for Geometry and Gridded datasets. While Voreen
provides a rapid prototyping environment, VTK volume visualization aims for
production quality, performance, and Ubiquitousness. Additionally, Voreen only
supports high-end desktop devices where as VTK supports multiple platforms
natively enabling researchers bridging the gap between academic research and
open source and industrial contributions.

Another open-source volume rendering ImageVis3D is being developed by the
researchers at the University of Utah~citep{SCI:ImageVis3D}. ImageVis3D is an
application as opposed to a library and provides support for large volume data
visualization, volume visualization on a desktop and mobile device, MIP, 1D and
2D transfer functions amongst many others.  It does not support Virtual Reality
environments and the flexibility of a data-flow networks.  Few other data type
specific volume rendering libraries such as Voxx~\citep{clendenon_voxx:_2002}
and ClearVolume~\cite{royer_clearvolume:_2015} provides visualization of
biological and light-sheet microscopy. PyMOL~\cite{schrodinger_llc_pymol_2015}
provide volume visualization capabilities only to molecular datasets. Finally,
hardware architecture specific volume visualiation libraries such as
OSPRay~\cite{wald_ospray_2017} and NVIDIA\textsuperscript{\textregistered}
Optix\textsuperscript{\texttrademark}~\citep{parker_optix:_2010} provide fast
large volume data visualization capabilities on Intel CPU and Nvidia GPU's but
lack support for non-native hardware.

Other than Voreen and ImageVis3D, many volumes rendering APIs exist, however,
except for Voreen, advanced volume visualization research performed by the
industry and academic communities are not publicly available. By providing an
open source volume rendering engine that supports multiple platforms natively,
researchers can use the engine as a bridge between academic research and open
source and industrial contributions.
